# Bhagavad Gita

## Chapter 1

### 1.1
dhṛtarāṣṭra uvāca
dharma-kṣetre kuru-kṣetre
samavetā yuyutsavaḥ
māmakāḥ pāṇḍavāś caiva
kim akurvata sañjaya

**Translation:** Dhritarashtra said: O Sanjaya, after my sons and the sons of Pandu assembled in the place of pilgrimage at Kurukshetra, desiring to fight, what did they do?

**Commentary by Srila A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada (Gaudiya-sampradaya):** Bhagavad-gita is the most widely read theistic science summarized in the Gita-mahatmya. There it is said that one should read Bhagavad-gita very scrutinizingly with the help of a person who is a devotee of Sri Krishna and try to understand it without personally motivated interpretations. The example of clear understanding is there in the Bhagavad-gita itself, in the way the teaching is understood by Arjuna, who heard the Gita directly from the Lord. If someone is fortunate enough to understand the Bhagavad-gita in that line of disciplic succession, without motivated interpretation, then he surpasses all studies of Vedic wisdom, and all scriptures of the world. One will find in the Bhagavad-gita all that is contained in other scriptures, but the reader will also find things which are not to be found elsewhere. That is the specific standard of the Gita. It is the perfect theistic science because it is directly spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Sri Krishna.

### 1.2
sañjaya uvāca
dṛṣṭvā tu pāṇḍavānīkaṁ
vyūḍhaṁ duryodhanas tadā
ācāryam upasaṅgamya
rājā vacanam abravīt

**Translation:** Sanjaya said: After seeing the army of the Pandavas drawn in military formation, King Duryodhana approached his teacher and spoke the following words.

**Commentary by Srila Vishvanatha Chakravarti Thakura (Gaudiya-sampradaya):** How did Arjuna fall into confusion? Vaishampayana told Janamejdaya: Dhritarashtra asked: "What did my sons and the Pandavas do at Kurukshetra?" "But you yourself said that they wanted to fight!" Kurukshetra is a place of pilgrimage (kurukṣetram deva yajanam, Shatapatha Brahmana). Here Duryodhana and his followers could leave their bodies. The Pandavas are followers of dharma. Both groups could come to peace. But Dhritarashtra expressed hope for peace, but inwardly feared: if there is no battle, his sons will not be able to hold power. He concealed this before Sanjaya. Dharma-kshetra is a field of rotating dharma. Krishna supported Yudhishthira. The Somakas (Duryodhana and others) also grew here, but they should have been destroyed.

### 1.3
paśyaitāṁ pāṇḍu-putrāṇām
ācārya mahatīṁ camūm
vyūḍhāṁ drupada-putreṇa
tava śiṣyeṇa dhīmatā

**Translation:** O my teacher, behold the great army of the sons of Pandu, so expertly arranged by your intelligent disciple the son of Drupada.

**Commentary by Srila Ramanuja (Sri-sampradaya):** 1.1–1.19. Duryodhana, seeing the army of the Pandavas protected by Bhima and his own army protected by Bhishma, and seeing that his army was smaller, spoke to Drona. Bhishma, in order to encourage him, loudly blew his conch shell. Arjuna and Sri Krishna, his charioteer, also blew their divine conch shells. Their sound shook the hearts of the Kauravas.

### 1.4
atra śūrā maheṣvāsā
bhīmārjuna-samā yudhi
yuyudhāno virāṭaś ca
drupadaś ca mahā-rathaḥ

**Translation:** Here in this army are many heroic bowmen equal in fighting to Bhima and Arjuna: great fighters like Yuyudhana, Virata and Drupada.

### 1.5
dhṛṣṭaketuś cekitānaḥ
kāśirājaś ca vīryavān
purujit kuntibhojaś ca
śaibyaś ca nara-puṅgavaḥ

**Translation:** There are also great heroic, powerful fighters like Dhrishtaketu, Chekitana, Kashiraja, Purujit, Kuntibhoja and Shaibya.

### 1.6
yudhāmanyuś ca vikrānta
uttamaujāś ca vīryavān
saubhadro draupadeyāś ca
sarva eva mahā-rathāḥ

**Translation:** There are the mighty Yudhamanyu, the very powerful Uttamauja, the son of Subhadra and the sons of Draupadi. All these warriors are great chariot fighters.

### 1.7
asmākaṁ tu viśiṣṭā ye
tān nibodha dvijottama
nāyakā mama sainyasya
saññārthañ tān bravīmi te

**Translation:** But for your information, O best of the brahmanas, let me tell you about the captains who are especially qualified to lead my military force.

### 1.8
bhavān bhīṣmaś ca karṇaś ca
kṛpaś ca samitiñjayaḥ
aśvatthāmā vikarṇaś ca
saumadattis tathaiva ca

**Translation:** There are personalities like you, Bhishma, Karna, Kripa, Ashvatthama, Vikarna and the son of Somadatta called Bhurishrava, who are always victorious in battle.

### 1.9
anye ca bahavaḥ śūrā
mad-arthe tyakta-jīvitāḥ
nānā-śastra-praharaṇāḥ
sarve yuddha-viśāradāḥ

**Translation:** There are many other heroes who are prepared to lay down their lives for my sake. All of them are well equipped with different kinds of weapons, and all are experienced in military science.

### 1.10
aparyāptaṁ tad asmākaṁ
balaṁ bhīṣmābhirakṣitam
paryāptaṁ tv idam eteṣāṁ
balaṁ bhīmābhirakṣitam

**Translation:** Our strength is immeasurable, and we are perfectly protected by Grandfather Bhishma, whereas the strength of the Pandavas, carefully protected by Bhima, is limited.

### 1.11
ayaneṣu ca sarveṣu
yathā-bhāgam avasthitāḥ
bhīṣmam evābhirakṣantu
bhavantaḥ sarva eva hi

**Translation:** All of you must now give full support to Grandfather Bhishma, as you stand at your respective strategic points of entrance into the phalanx of the army.

### 1.12
tasya sañjanayan harṣaṁ
kuru-vṛddhaḥ pitāmahaḥ
siṁha-nādaṁ vinadyoccaiḥ
śaṅkhaṁ dadhmau pratāpavān

**Translation:** Then Bhishma, the great valiant grandsire of the Kuru dynasty, the grandfather of the fighters, blew his conchshell very loudly, making a sound like the roar of a lion, giving Duryodhana joy.

### 1.13
tataḥ śaṅkhāś ca bheryaś ca
paṇavānaka-gomukhāḥ
sahasaivābhyahanyanta
sa śabdas tumulo 'bhavat

**Translation:** After that, the conchshells, drums, bugles, trumpets and horns were all suddenly sounded, and the combined sound was tumultuous.

### 1.14
tataḥ śvetair hayair yukte
mahati syandane sthitau
mādhavaḥ pāṇḍavaś caiva
divyau śaṅkhau pradadhmatuḥ

**Translation:** On the other side, both Lord Krishna and Arjuna, stationed on a great chariot drawn by white horses, sounded their transcendental conchshells.

### 1.15
pāñcajanyaṁ hṛṣīkeśo
devadattaṁ dhanañjayaḥ
pauṇḍraṁ dadhmau mahā-śaṅkhaṁ
bhīma-karmā vṛkodaraḥ

**Translation:** Lord Krishna blew His conchshell, called Panchajanya; Arjuna blew his, the Devadatta; and Bhima, the voracious eater and performer of herculean tasks, blew his terrific conchshell, called Paundra.

### 1.16
anantavijayaṁ rājā
kuntī-putro yudhiṣṭhiraḥ
nakulaḥ sahadevaś ca
sughoṣa-maṇipuṣpakau

**Translation:** King Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, blew his conchshell, the Ananta-vijaya, and Nakula and Sahadeva blew the Sughosha and Manipushpaka.

### 1.17
kāśyaś ca parameṣvāsaḥ
śikhaṇḍī ca mahā-rathaḥ
dhṛṣṭadyumno virāṭaś ca
sātyakiś cāparājitaḥ

**Translation:** The King of Kashi, an excellent archer; Shikhandi, the great fighter; Dhrishtadyumna, Virata, and Satyaki, the unconquerable;

### 1.18
drupado draupadeyāś ca
sarvaśaḥ pṛthivī-pate
saubhadraś ca mahā-bāhuḥ
śaṅkhān dadhmuḥ pṛthak pṛthak

**Translation:** Drupada, the sons of Draupadi, and others, O King, such as the mighty-armed son of Subhadra, all blew their respective conchshells.

### 1.19
sa ghoṣo dhārtarāṣṭrāṇāṁ
hṛdayāni vyadārayat
nabhaś ca pṛthivīṁ caiva
tumulo vyanunadayan

**Translation:** The blowing of these different conchshells became uproarious. Vibrating both in the sky and on the earth, it shattered the hearts of the sons of Dhritarashtra.

### 1.20
atha vyavasthitān dṛṣṭvā
dhārtarāṣṭrān kapi-dhvajaḥ
pravṛtte śastra-sampāte
dhanur udyamya pāṇḍavaḥ

**Translation:** At that time Arjuna, the son of Pandu, seated in the chariot bearing the flag marked with Hanuman, took up his bow and prepared to shoot his arrows. O King, after looking at the sons of Dhritarashtra drawn in military array, Arjuna then spoke to Lord Krishna these words.

### 1.21
hṛṣīkeśaṁ tadā vākyam
idam āha mahī-pate
arjuna uvāca
senayor ubhayor madhye
rathaṁ sthāpaya me 'cyuta

**Translation:** Arjuna said: O infallible one, please draw my chariot between the two armies

### 1.22
yāvad etān nirīkṣe 'haṁ
yoddhu-kāmān avasthitān
kair mayā saha yoddhavyam
asmin raṇa-samudyame

**Translation:** so that I may see those present here, who desire to fight, and with whom I must contend in this great trial of arms.

### 1.23
yotsyamānān avekṣe 'haṁ
ya ete 'tra samāgatāḥ
dhārtarāṣṭrasya durbuddher
yuddhe priya-cikīrṣavaḥ

**Translation:** Let me see those who have come here to fight, wishing to please the evil-minded son of Dhritarashtra.

### 1.24
sañjaya uvāca
evam ukto hṛṣīkeśo
guḍākeśena bhārata
senayor ubhayor madhye
sthāpayitvā rathottamam

**Translation:** Sanjaya said: O descendant of Bharata, having thus been addressed by Arjuna, Lord Krishna drew up the fine chariot in the midst of the armies of both parties.

### 1.25
bhīṣma-droṇa-pramukhataḥ
sarveṣāṁ ca mahī-kṣitām
uvāca pārtha paśyaitān
samavetān kurūn iti

**Translation:** In the presence of Bhishma, Drona and all the other chieftains of the world, the Lord said, Just behold, Partha, all the Kurus assembled here.

### 1.26
tatrāpaśyat sthitān pārthaḥ
pitṝn atha pitāmahān
ācāryān mātulān bhrātṝn
putrān pautrān sakhīṁs tathā

**Translation:** There Arjuna could see, within the midst of the armies of both parties, his fathers, grandfathers, teachers, maternal uncles, brothers, sons, grandsons, friends,

### 1.27
śvaśurān suhṛdaś caiva
senayor ubhayor api
tān samīkṣya sa kaunteyaḥ
sarvān bandhūn avasthitān

**Translation:** and also fathers-in-law and well-wishers—all present there. When the son of Kunti, Arjuna, saw all these different grades of friends and relatives,

### 1.28
kṛpayā parayāviṣṭo
viṣīdann idam abravīt
arjuna uvāca
dṛṣṭvemāṁ sva-janaṁ kṛṣṇa
yuyutsuṁ samupasthitam

**Translation:** he became overwhelmed with compassion and spoke thus with sadness. Arjuna said: My dear Krishna, seeing my friends and relatives present before me in such a fighting spirit,

### 1.29
sīdanti mama gātrāṇi
mukhaṁ ca pariśuṣyati
vepathuś ca śarīre me
roma-harṣaś ca jāyate

**Translation:** I feel the limbs of my body quivering and my mouth drying up. My whole body is trembling, my hair is standing on end,

### 1.30
gāṇḍīvaṁ sraṁsate hastāt
tvak caiva paridahyate
na ca śaknomy avasthātuṁ
bhramatīva ca me manaḥ

**Translation:** my bow Gandiva is slipping from my hand, and my skin is burning. I am now unable to stand here any longer. My mind is reeling.

### 1.31
nimittāni ca paśyāmi
viparītāni keśava
na ca śreyo 'nupaśyāmi
hatvā sva-janam āhave

**Translation:** I see only causes of misfortune, O Krishna, killer of the Kesi demon. I do not see how any good can come from killing my own kinsmen in this battle,

### 1.32
na kāṅkṣe vijayaṁ kṛṣṇa
na ca rājyaṁ sukhāni ca
kiṁ no rājyena govinda
kiṁ bhogair jīvitena vā

**Translation:** nor can I, my dear Krishna, desire any subsequent victory, kingdom, or happiness. O Govinda, of what avail to us are a kingdom, happiness or even life itself

### 1.33
yeṣām arthe kāṅkṣitaṁ no
rājyaṁ bhogāḥ sukhāni ca
ta ime 'vasthitā yuddhe
prāṇāṁs tyaktvā dhanāni ca

**Translation:** when all those for whom we desire kingdom, enjoyments and pleasures are now arrayed on this battlefield? O Madhusudana, when teachers, fathers, sons, grandfathers, maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law and other relatives

### 1.34
ācāryāḥ pitaraḥ putrās
tathaiva ca pitāmahāḥ
mātulāḥ śvaśurāḥ pautrāḥ
śyālāḥ sambandhinas tathā

**Translation:** Teachers, fathers, sons, grandfathers, maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law and all relatives

### 1.35
etān na hantum icchāmi
ghnato 'pi madhusūdana
api trailokya-rājyasya
hetoḥ kiṁ nu mahī-kṛte

**Translation:** are ready to give up their lives and properties and are standing before me, I do not wish to fight them, even though they might otherwise kill me. O killer of Madhu, for the sake of whatever kingdom, happiness or pleasure, I do not want to kill them.

### 1.36
nihatya dhārtarāṣṭrān naḥ
kā prītiḥ syāj janārdana
pāpam evāśrayed asmān
hatvaitān ātatāyinaḥ

**Translation:** What pleasure will we derive from killing the sons of Dhritarashtra, O Janardana? Sin will overcome us if we slay such aggressors.

### 1.37
tasmān nārhā vayaṁ hantuṁ
dhārtarāṣṭrān sa-bāndhavān
sva-janaṁ hi kathaṁ hatvā
sukhinaḥ syāma mādhava

**Translation:** Therefore it is not proper for us to kill the sons of Dhritarashtra and our friends. What should we gain, O Krishna, husband of the goddess of fortune, and how could we be happy by killing our own kinsmen?

### 1.38
yadyapy ete na paśyanti
lobhopahata-cetasaḥ
kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ
mitra-drohe ca pātakam

**Translation:** O Janardana, although these men, their hearts overtaken by greed, see no fault in killing one's family or quarreling with friends,

### 1.39
kathaṁ na jñeyam asmābhiḥ
pāpād asmān nivartitum
kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ
prapaśyadbhir janārdana

**Translation:** why should we, who can see the crime in destroying a family, engage in these acts of sin?

### 1.40
kula-kṣaye praṇaśyanti
kula-dharmāḥ sanātanāḥ
dharme naṣṭe kulaṁ kṛtsnam
adharmo 'bhibhavaty uta

**Translation:** When a dynasty is destroyed, the eternal family tradition is vanquished, and thus the rest of the family becomes involved in irreligion.

### 1.41
adharmābhibhavāt kṛṣṇa
praduṣyanti kula-striyaḥ
strīṣu duṣṭāsu vārṣṇeya
jāyate varṇa-saṅkaraḥ

**Translation:** When irreligion is prominent in the family, O Krishna, the women of the family become polluted, and from the degradation of womanhood, O descendant of Vrishni, comes unwanted progeny.

### 1.42
saṅkaro narakāyaiva
kula-ghnānāṁ kulasya ca
patanti pitaro hy eṣāṁ
lupta-piṇḍodaka-kriyāḥ

**Translation:** An increase of unwanted population certainly causes hellish life both for the family and for those who destroy the family tradition. The ancestors of such corrupt families fall down, because the performances for offering them food and water are entirely stopped.

### 1.43
doṣair etaiḥ kula-ghnānāṁ
varṇa-saṅkara-kārakaiḥ
utsādyante jāti-dharmāḥ
kula-dharmāś ca śāśvatāḥ

**Translation:** By the evil deeds of those who destroy the family tradition and thus give rise to unwanted children, all kinds of community projects and family welfare activities are devastated.

### 1.44
utsanna-kula-dharmāṇāṁ
manuṣyāṇāṁ janārdana
narake niyataṁ vāso
bhavatīty anuśuśruma

**Translation:** O Janardana, I have heard by disciplic succession that those who destroy family traditions dwell always in hell.

### 1.45
aho bata mahat pāpaṁ
kartuṁ vyavasitā vayam
yad rājya-sukha-lobhena
hantuṁ sva-janam udyatāḥ

**Translation:** Alas, how strange it is that we are preparing to commit greatly sinful acts. Driven by the desire to enjoy royal happiness, we are intent on killing our own kinsmen.

### 1.46
yadi mām apratīkāram
aśastraṁ śastra-pāṇayaḥ
dhārtarāṣṭrā raṇe hanyus
tan me kṣemataraṁ bhavet

**Translation:** Better for me if the sons of Dhritarashtra, weapons in hand, were to kill me unarmed and unresisting on the battlefield.

### 1.47
sañjaya uvāca
evam uktvārjunaḥ saṅkhye
rathopastha upāviśat
visṛjya sa-śaraṁ cāpaṁ
śoka-saṁvigna-mānasaḥ

**Translation:** Sanjaya said: Arjuna, having thus spoken on the battlefield, cast aside his bow and arrows and sat down on the chariot, his mind overwhelmed with grief.

---

*Thus ends the First Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita in the matter of Observing the Armies on the Battlefield of Kurukshetra.*

